When I was young,
one of my favorite desserts
was my mother’s sweet potato pie.
It always tasted the same.
To me, it was perfect every time.
I’d often ask her,
“Ma, what do you put in here
to make it taste so good?”
She’d always respond,
“I just use the same stuff every time.”
In other words, number one,
she wasn’t going to tell me.
And two,
she had a recipe that worked,
so she never changed it.
Well, the Bible is like a cookbook,
full of recipes that work,
that can make
our life spiritually successful.
Please note how Paul explains
the benefits of these recipes
at 2 Timothy 3:16, 17:
“All Scripture is inspired of God
“and beneficial for teaching, for reproving,
“for setting things straight,
for disciplining in righteousness,
“so that the man of God
may be fully competent,
completely equipped for every good work.”
Sometimes the recipe from God’s inspired Word
comes in the form of a Bible example.
As we study that example,
we extract qualities and attitudes
that we can imitate.
At other times,
there’s a list of qualities,
such as the various aspects
of the fruitage of God’s spirit
mentioned in Galatians chapter 5
or the list of positive things to consider
at Philippians 4:8, 9.
And, of course,
there are numerous Bible principles
that we can use
to help us make good decisions.
Meditating on and applying
these principles,
qualities, and examples
can be a recipe
that contributes to spiritual success.
Let’s consider one example.
It’s recorded at 1 Peter 3:8.
Take note of the ingredients.
“All of you have unity of mind,
“fellow feeling,
“brotherly affection,
“tender compassion,
and humility.”
This is a recipe
of five beautiful qualities
that contribute to our spiritual success.
How so?
Let’s discuss the ingredients.
Peter first mentions “unity of mind.”
The footnote says “think in agreement.”
So we must think in agreement
with one another
but especially with Jehovah
and his organization.
In what way?
The latter part of Isaiah 30:15 says:
“Your strength will be in keeping calm
and showing trust.”
That’s exactly what the faithful slave
has done.
So let us have unity of mind with them
and have the same calmness
and confidence in Jehovah
as we face personal challenges in our life.
In 2 Kings chapter 4,
a Shunammite woman is mentioned
who had confidence in the prophet Elisha.
She suffered a terrible tragedy in her life.
Yet, she remained calm
and showed trust
in “the man of the true God,” Elisha.
Her example of trust
in Jehovah’s representative
is worthy of imitation.
In fact, there is an expression
she uses in chapter 4
that conveys the level of trust
we want to have in Jehovah
and his earthly representatives today.
Let me tell you about this woman.
She and her husband lived in Shunem.
Elisha would regularly make
encouraging visits with them
when he was in that city.
Elisha appreciated their hospitality
and wanted to do something kind for them.
What would he do?
Well, verses 14-16
of 2 Kings chapter 4
indicate that she did not have a son
and that her husband was old.
So Elisha told her that the next year
she would be embracing a son.
Well, as Elisha foretold,
she gave birth the next year.
But unfortunately,
something drastic happened.
The child grew up
and one day went out to work with his father.
In verse 19,
the boy complained of a headache,
which led to his eventual death.
Oh my!
What would this woman do?
This was her only son.
Well, she had confidence
in “the man of the true God,” Elisha,
so she says to her husband in verse 22:
“Send me, please, one of the attendants
“and one of the donkeys,
“and let me go quickly
to the man of the true God and return.”
In verse 23, her husband asks:
“Why are you going to see him today?”
In other words,
“What can he do for us?”
Ah, note her response
at the end of verse 23 and verse 24:
“However, she said:
“‘Everything is all right.’
“So she saddled the donkey
“and said to her attendant: ‘Go quickly.
Do not slow down for me unless I tell you to.’”
So this calm, trusting woman
rides about 19 miles, or 30 kilometers,
and finds Elisha.
And he ends up resurrecting her son.
Her trusting relationship
and association with Elisha
had given her confidence.
Although she experienced a tragedy,
she knew that everything was all right.
Elisha’s faith and confidence in Jehovah
helped this devoted woman also
to remain calm and confident
when facing adversity.
At Isaiah 41:10,
note Jehovah’s assurance:
“Do not be afraid, for I am with you.
“Do not be anxious, for I am your God.
“I will fortify you, yes, I will help you,
“I will really hold on to you
with my right hand of righteousness.”
So let’s work hard to have unity of mind
with Jehovah’s organization
by keeping calm
and showing trust in Jehovah
and by being confident
that with Jehovah’s help
everything will be all right.
That’s a beautiful ingredient
in this recipe for spiritual success.
At 1 Peter 3:8,
Peter next mentions three more ingredients.
They are aspects of love:
“fellow feeling,
“brotherly affection,
tender compassion.”
These aspects of love convey empathy.
Empathy is “the ability to understand
and share the feelings of another.”
As this system draws to a close,
Satan will try to divide us from within.
So love for our brothers and sisters
and empathizing with one another
will become ever more important.
It will serve to unify us.
Think of the empathy
of Jehovah’s organization.
We all have personal challenges,
but so do our overseers,
those taking the lead
in the organization here on earth.
Some of them have lost loved ones in death
just like us.
Some have experienced sickness and anxiety
We love them for their empathy.
Think about the heavenly part
of Jehovah’s organization.
Since Satan’s rebellion,
Jehovah has been disappointed,
saddened, angered at the actions
of imperfect men.
These are real feelings
that our empathetic heavenly Father
possesses.
Jesus experienced
similar disappointment and sadness
as he also saw the rebellion
of Satan, Adam, and Eve
and what’s resulted.
In fact,
Jesus’ understanding became deeper
when he became human
and began to experience human emotions.
The April 15, 2002, Watchtower  article
entitled
“Empathy—Key to Kindness and Compassion”
mentioned three ways
we can sharpen our sensitivity
to the needs and feelings of others.
The first: ‘Listen.
‘By listening carefully,
‘we learn what problems others face.
‘And the better we listen,
‘the more likely
they will open up their hearts
and reveal their feelings.’
Second: ‘Observe.
‘Not everyone will openly tell us
‘how they feel
‘or what they are going through.
‘A keen observer will notice
‘when a fellow Christian needs encouragement
or some practical assistance.’
Third: “Use Your Imagination.
“The most powerful way to stimulate empathy
“is to ask yourself:
“‘If I were in this situation,
“‘how would I feel?
“‘How would I respond?
What would I need?’”
So fellow feeling, brotherly affection,
and tender compassion
are aspects of loving empathy
and are valuable ingredients
to our spiritual success
and will benefit others.
The final quality highlighted at 1 Peter 3:8
is humility.
Why do we need humility?
Because we need to trust.
Trust in Jehovah and his organization
requires humility
—not relying on our own strength or wisdom.
Humility helps us to cope
with whatever God permits.
When we face anxiety
and pressure in our life,
we may yearn for immediate relief.
But humility helps us to trust
that Jehovah knows precisely when
and how to act in our behalf.
So we wait
patiently.
Jehovah always responds to our needs
in his time and in his way.
Humility helps us to admit
that Jehovah’s thoughts
are vastly superior to our own.
We recognize our limited discernment
in comparison
with Jehovah’s all-encompassing perception.
He sees things we do not discern,
and thus we trust
that his way of doing things
is always best.
So as the great tribulation approaches,
humbly trust in Jehovah
and his organization.
First Peter chapter 5,
and verse 6 says this:
“Humble yourselves, therefore,
“under the mighty hand of God,
so that he may exalt you in due time.”
Brothers, there is no better place to be
than “under the mighty hand of God.”
Humility is a beautiful ingredient
that helps us to remain there.
So, what were the ingredients
in our recipe for spiritual success?
First was unity of mind.
Be at unity with Jehovah’s organization today
by keeping calm and showing trust.
In the words of the Shunammite woman
in 2 Kings chapter 4,
when facing adversity,
always know that with Jehovah
“everything is all right.”
Second was fellow feeling,
brotherly affection, and tender compassion
—all aspects of loving empathy.
Remember, we’re all in this together.
The celestial chariot
is empathetic toward what we face
and will respond
to our personal and organizational needs.
Finally, try always
to include humility
in your recipe for success.
Humility requires trust,
so trust that Jehovah’s way of doing things
is always best.
Psalm 119:105 says
that the Bible “is a lamp to my foot,
and a light for my path.”
So take time to consider
a portion of God’s Word each day.
As situations, decisions,
and challenges arise,
search for the right recipe
—Bible example, Christian quality, principle.
When you do,
Jehovah will light up
the path ahead of you
and help you to be spiritually successful.